Let us learn about the data types available in C++ language already in  the previous video I have given
you the reason or the idea why we need to get data types every language supports data type.
without data type
There is no use of writing the programs so let us learn what are the data types then,
Also we will learn how to use them means how to use them by declaring the variables.
So let us get going what have you of all the data types available in C++.
I have a chart here that is showing the data types then, in this they can be categorized in to 3.
Now majorly you have to understand this one.
This portion, data types are called primitive data types primitive means in house, living, the one
which are living inside C++ so that are directly provided by compiler.
So primitive data types are basic data types of C++.
They are of three types that is categorization again integral type integral which means there
is no decimal point.
Boolean means true or false next, floating point with the decimal decimal is also called Floating Point.
So this is the broader categorization, under integral we have int and char.
Character is integral.
I will show you.
What does it mean, integer and character comes under integral means that they will not have a decimal
point.
Yes then floating point there are two float and double.
They are similar only just some difference are there, we will learn about it.
So before going into details of this let us have a look at these also. user defined data types are
available
First one is enum. enumeration that you will find in this section only right.
And structure and union.
These are anlother one and classes.
That's what the C++ is for, C++ supports object orientation so actual C++ concepts and the programming starts
from classes.
We will learn a lot of things are there to learn about it, then last,
arrays, pointers and references we have these as a separate topics in some sections so you can
check that these are the detailed Lengthy topics so there's all the things are bigger topics.
We have a section for each.
Now in this video.
You have to learn these things the data types and remember now only that is very important right.
Because every time we'll be using them.
So you should be able to recall what does it mean.
So here itself you should learn them.
Let us see what are the data types.
So for those data types we have to know a few things and among these things you must remember few things.
I'll highlight what are the things that you should remember.
Let us look at the table.
data types are int, float, double, character and boolean and these are their sizes. sizes means
how many bytes of memory they take, like in the previous video I said that if you take only one byte
then we can store a small size number.
If you want us to a bigger number then what.
So that's what depending on the number that you can store.
That's what every data type have some number of bytes so this you will learn in detail.
That is two bite it take & this take 4 bite, and this take 8 bite .
And this take 1 bite.
It is undefined.
It can be one byte or less. now in each data type depending on the capacity it's its size.
There is a possible range of values that it can store so their values are also given so you can
note on these one, and out of this.
You must remember the range of values for this one and this one. integer, that is, I will read out
- 3 2 7 6 8 to
3 2 7 6 7. negative, positive so it supports both positive and negative numbers then for character
-128 to 127.
This you should remember always next about float and  double if you can remember it's well and good
other wise it's not a problem, for float i will read out -3.4*10^-38 and positive one is
3.4*10^38 now.
Now double is -1.7*10^-308 to 1.7*10^308 .
So how do remember them is see double is one point seven, number is one point seven.
So if you can remember this is sufficient.
Now for float, double that 1.7 it'll become three point four so it is 3.4
3.4.
Right.
How to remember the values I am showing you, then this is 38.
So this is 3 0 8.
So this way you can remember this one if  at all you want to remember
now let us talk about integer see in integer may take.
Either two byte it or four byte depending on the version of compiler you are using most of the compilers.
Now take four bytes only if you are using turbo c, if you know about it and you are using it
then it takes two bytes, turbo c takes two bytes because it opens in DOS box it goes in good dos shell
and run there so that it takes two bytes otherwise integer takes four bytes.
But in my discussion every time I will be saying int two bytes because when I have to show some
calculation and So all two bytes will be easy for me for explanation.
Otherwise taking a bigger size data will be difficult for explanation.
So I will assume int  takes two bytes every time.
Now let us understand how this int is getting this range and this ranges for two bytes not for
4 bytes.
Let us see how it is taking - 3 2 7 6 8 to 3 2 7 6 7.
Let us look at this.
It is taking two bytes so two bytes means the total how many bits.
Sixteen bits.
so i will draw this first.
So here they have two bytes.
This is first byte,  this the second byte total 16.
Bits are there, sixteen bits together, two bytes together works as a single variable in their data that
is integer so hold the sixteen bits that use? one of the Bit.
This is called As most significant bit and this is called as the least significant bit.
So this bit is reserved for assignment, if that is  one means the number is negative.
If that is Zero means number is positive then how many bits are remaining for writing a number.
Only 15 bits 0 to 14 so 2^15 is 3 2 7 6 8.
This is how as a 3 2 7 6 8 and that is up to 3 2 7 6 7.
So that's why the number is the store only in 15 bits it has to support sign also positive and
negative ALSO.
Also that is the reason one bit is reserved.
The remaining bits are used for storing a number.
So this is common for all the languages not just C++ it is true for C also and this even is true for
Java also.
It happened similarly in the Java also if two bytes are used anywhere so two bytes if a number is restored
in 2 bytes.
This is the largest number that we can store. now i will write down the range 0 3 2 7 6 7.
If I take the range of this number it will not be starting from 1.
I think will be starting from zero so it is 0 to 3 2 7 6 7.
That's why it is 7 no next.
This has to be in the positive also negative also.
So let me write on this so 0 2 3 2 7 6 7.
This is positive side than 0 2 3 2 7 6 7.
It is a negative side so this is a positive side.
This is negative side in this.
This is negative means a negative zero will also be that negative zero is not a number.
So that's why that negative zero is taken AS minus 3 2 7 6 8.
It is assumed as minus 2 equals 7 6 8.
It happens automatically in binary number form if the no. is negative and largest then
-3 2 7 6 8 to 3 2 7 6 7.
That is the reason we have one number extra here because that -0 has taken as minus 3
2 7 6 8.
That's how it is getting this range now.
This is sufficient for understanding about integer.
Now let us come to character.
How come.
Character is taking numbers minus 128 to127 and it is taking one bite.
I'll explain you about it, so character takes one bite so one bite.
One bit is of that sign bit, now many how many limits are there 0 to 6 total 7 bits are there2^ 7 is 128 128
means 0 to 127 now positive as well as negative so negative 127 negative 0 will also be there.
That is the reason minus 128  to 127.
This range of character.
Let us coming.
to the point.
How come a character is a no.? see.
Computer works on binary no. system, that is zeros and ones so they understand only zeroes and ones
nothing else.
Right.
Then how to represent the character.
Character should also be represented in zeros and  those zeros and ones.
We understand them as decimal no. system, we understand them as numbers.
Then how do we present characters, so for
Character codes are given, character codes are to given.
So let us see what are codes.
The codes are called as ASCII codes or ASIC key codes American standard code for information interchange.
So for every alphabet or every letter every letter in the English language as well as the special symbols.
There is a code given.
So what are those codes.
Capital A is represented as sixty five then  B is represented as sixty six so a number
is used for representing character.
Now if you'll see this the no.  sixty five if you say no no.
That is a character means it is A.
So only on the screen the printing will be done as A but inside the memory it is sixty five.
Its in binary form that all the codes are used for representing characters.
capital Z will be  ninety and small a is ninety seven and small b is ninety eight and goes
on small z is one thirty two and zero letter 0 on the keyboard.
If you see that is also a symbol of character what have you treat it as a number of used them as number
but everything on the keyboard is a character so zero is also character so for that symbol is .
This is forty eight and one is forty nine and goes on last digit nine is fifty seven.
These are the codes now one important thing you must remember these codes you must remember this is
very important.
You have to remember this range.
And you should remember these codes.
This is very important.
All right then for other special symbols also codes are available so you can learn about them.
You search in Google you will find out all the list of characters and their codes available.
Search for ASCII codes now little more about data types.
I would talk about modifiers.
Let us discuss about modifiers.
There are two modifiers using these modifiers.
You can modify these data types as per your requirement.
So quickly let us look at this.
There are two identifiers.
One is unsigned.
And another one is long.
So you can say unsigned integer.
Now this integer which is ticking bought negative as well as positive now it would take only positive.
So what are the range 0 to  6 5 5 3 5.
This will be the range, double this one double this one.
32 thousand you double it 65 thousand
So 6 5 5 3 5 is the range 0 to 6 5 5 3 5 means signed bit is not there all 16 bits are used for storing
a number integer become unsigned.
So if you don't have any negative numbers and you want to get a bigger range you have a larger value
then you can go for this.
Then you can also see unsigned char.
So when you say unsigned character this range you will get double that is you can store the number 0 to
255 so you can store the numbers also now if suppose a character you have your numbers are very small
instead of storing alphabets you can store a number also in a character.
So its range becomes this so unsigned can be used only with integer and character you cannot use it
with any other.
Next one is long. long you can use it with integer.
So if int is taking two bytes then long int will take four bites and if suppose it is taking 4 bytes
long int will take eight bytes depending on the compiler already i told you about integer. a long can also
be taken with
double long double takes 10 bytes see float is for decimal number and if this range is not sufficient
does a small number minus three eight.
That is five plus three.
A small amount.
If you want a larger number than you can take double.
So it is minus three zero eight .
Bigger one.
So this is a very small value that is very big value 3 not eight bigger number.
If you want is still larger then you can take long double, long float is no meaning because long float
itself is double then long double you can take.
So it will not be 16 byte it will be 10 byte.
So that's all about modifiers modifiers you can use them with limited data types you cannot
use unsigned with everything and you cant use along with everything you can not have long char.
So that's all about the data types see the end of the course  you will find one section called misellineous
there.
I have discussed little more about the data types so if you're not a beginner then I suggest you watch
that or if you're a beginner after completing the course you watch that section in that section some
topics are discussed in more detail.
So for the beginners it will be very difficult for them to grasp it.
So I have kept them as miscellaneous topic so I suggest you watch those videos.
If you want more details about the data types so there are videos for other topics also under misellineous
section.
Now next we will see variables what are variables.
Don't miss this video.
So in the next video i will discuss about variables.